 <-----------------> IPS
 
What is the nature of the communication between the device and this IP?
- Is this communication expected?

What protocol or service was used?
- Was non-DNS traffic routed through port 53?
- Was encrypted traffic sent via port 80?

What happened on the device immediately before and after the event in question?
- Did a recently downloaded file initiate the connection?

What data was transferred during the HTTP communication sequence?
- Was a file downloaded?

If files were transferred, were they malicious in nature?
- Look up file hash. 

Is there anything suspicious about the user agent that was used?
- Custom user-agents are suspicious.

Is there anything suspicious about the referrer that led to communication with this IP?
- Does referrer originate from a suspicious domain?

Is there anything suspicious about the domain name in the request?
- Look up domain in threat intelligence platform.

Is there anything suspicious about the certificate exchange?
- Look up certificate that HTTPS traffic exchanges.

When did the communication between this IP and the device start and end? 
 
What was the volume, and did it occur all at once or over time with some level of frequency?
- Was the communication automated or human-initiated?

What other devices on the network have communicated with this IP?


What user is associated with the device the IP communicated with?

Is this type of communication normal for this device?

Has any suspicious domains resolved to this IP?

Have a large number of domains resolved to this IP?

Who is the registered owner of the IP space that includes this IP?

Is any malware known to communicate with this IP?

Does this IP appear on any OSINT blacklists?

 <-----------------> DOMAINS

What IPs did the domain resolve to when the communication was observed?

Has this domain resolved to any suspicious IPs? 

Have other suspicious domains resolved to an IP that this domain has also resolved to?

Has this domain resolved to a large number of IPs in a short time?

Who is the registered owner of this domain? Is there anything suspicious there?

Is any malware known to communicate with this domain?

Does this domain appear on any OSINT blacklists?

<------------> FILE HASHES

What are the capabilities of this file?
- Sandbox

Are any OSINT sources aware of potentially malicious files sharing the same imphash as this file?
- Look for related files 

Are any of those file hashes present on any internal systems?

Have any of those file hashes been observed in network traffic?

Are any artifacts from the sandbox execution present on the affected system?

If the file is compiled--when was it compiled?

Does the name of the file look suspicious?

Did the file execute?

Was there any suspicious network communication right after the file was downloaded?

Is there any evidence of process execution on the host?

Did any other devices download or upload this file?

Were any other files downloaded with the same imphash as the file in question?

 <------------> USERNAME

What systems does this account normally authenticate to?

Is the activity occuring outside of the users normal usage window?

Does this user normally log into the network remotely?

Is the user an admin on the system?

What was the user doing before and after the suspicious event?

Is there anything suspicious running on the user's system?
